



Transport and Services Working Group                         P. Thatcher
Internet-Draft                                                    Google
Intended status: Standards Track                                H. Zhang
Expires: 8 October 2026                                                 
                                                         T. Brandstetter
                                                                  Google
                                                               J. Uberti
                                                                  OpenAI
                                                            6 April 2026


      ICE Renomination: Dynamically selecting ICE candidate pairs
                draft-thatcher-tsvwg-renomination-latest

Abstract

   This document describes an extension to the Interactive Connectivity
   Establishment (ICE) that enables the controlling ICE agent to
   dynamically change its selected candidate pair over time as network
   conditions change, and notify the controlled side accordingly.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Status information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-thatcher-tsvwg-renomination/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the tsvwg Working Group
   mailing list (mailto:tsvwg@ietf.org), which is archived at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/tsvwg/.  Subscribe at
   https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/tsvwg/.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 8 October 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Terminology
   3.  Design
     3.1.  Behavior
     3.2.  ICE Option
     3.3.  "Nomination" attribute
   4.  Interaction with ICE Lite
   5.  IANA Considerations
     5.1.  ICE Option Registration
     5.2.  STUN Attribute Registration
   6.  Security Considerations
   7.  Acknowledgements
   8.  References
     8.1.  Normative References
     8.2.  Informative References
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   ICE [RFC8445] agents take either the controlling or controlled role.
   During the ICE establishment process, the controlling and controlled
   agents communicate, using either regular or aggressive nomination, to
   agree upon which candidate pair they will use to exchange traffic.
   However, once ICE is established, there is no defined procedure for
   changing the selected pair without using an ICE restart.

   While the controlling ICE agent could unilaterally select a given
   candidate pair at any time, it has no straightforward way of
   authoritatively telling the controlled side what pair it has
   selected.  This greatly limits the controlling side's options.

   For example, if an ICE agent selects and nominates a candidate pair
   over a cellular network, and then later connects to a Wi-Fi network
   and trickles ICE candidates for the Wi-Fi network, it may wish to
   select and nominate a Wi-Fi candidate pair.  If soon thereafter the
   Wi-Fi network disconnects, the ICE agent may wish to select and
   nominate the cellular candidate pair again.  These sorts of mid-
   session changes to the selected pair are not possible under the
   current ICE procedures without an ICE restart.

   This document continues the work from the earlier individual
   Internet-Draft [I-D.thatcher-ice-renomination].

2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Design

   This document defines an extension to the ICE mechanism called
   renomination.  When active, renomination allows the controlling side
   to dynamically change the selected pair at any time, and notify the
   controlled side which pair it should use.

   This allows switching between known pairs, or, as in the scenario
   outlined above, if a new interface becomes available, the controlling
   side can switch to a pair where the local candidate is on the new
   interface.

   While this sort of dynamic change could be achieved with an ICE
   restart, a restart is a somewhat heavy operation that involves
   signaling new ICE credentials, gathering new candidates on both
   sides, and running the connectivity check mechanism for a whole new
   set of candidate pairs.  In particular, the signaling requirement can
   be especially problematic if the device is in the process of
   switching between networks.

   In contrast, the renomination mechanism only requires the exchange of
   a single ICE connectivity check.

   As with regular nomination, this specification does not prescribe a
   specific algorithm for the controlling agent to select a candidate
   pair.

3.1.  Behavior

   When renomination is active, the controlled side follows a process
   similar to regular nomination, except that more than one nomination
   request carrying USE-CANDIDATE can be sent during the lifetime of the
   ICE session, and the last valid nomination wins.  To avoid ambiguity
   if requests are received out of order, a new NOMINATION attribute
   (Section 3.3) MUST be included in every connectivity check that
   contains USE-CANDIDATE.  The value of the NOMINATION attribute is a
   monotonically increasing sequence number chosen by the controlling
   agent.  A nomination request whose NOMINATION value is less than or
   equal to the highest previously accepted NOMINATION value for the
   same ICE generation and component MUST be ignored.

   In order to ensure that candidate pairs other than the selected pair
   remain usable, both sides need to keep their candidates alive (e.g.,
   by refreshing an associated TURN allocation).  In addition, the
   controlling side MUST periodically send ICE consent checks on any
   candidate pair it wants to keep available for future nomination,
   using the consent freshness mechanism defined in [RFC7675].  The
   controlled side MUST issue a success response to these checks for all
   candidate pairs it intends to keep available for future nomination.
   However, either agent MAY limit the number and type of retained
   candidate pairs according to local policy.

   This allows the controlling side to maintain a set of valid candidate
   pairs, any one of which it can nominate at any time.

3.2.  ICE Option

   Naturally, this mechanism requires opt-in from both ICE agents.  To
   accomplish this, we define a new ICE option called "renomination2",
   where the "2" is added to avoid ambiguities with earlier versions of
   this draft.

   If one side signals "renomination2" and the other does not,
   renomination is not in use for that ICE session.  In that case, the
   controlling side MUST use standard ICE nomination procedures and MUST
   NOT send more than one effective nomination for a given component.

   Note that the offering side (typically, the controlling side, but not
   always, e.g., if the offerer is ICE Lite) MAY receive ICE checks
   prior to receiving the SDP answer that definitively indicates support
   for renomination.  In this case, the ICE checks might or might not
   include the NOMINATION attribute defined below.  Accordingly, when
   offering "renomination2" and operating in the controlled role, the
   offerer MUST be prepared to work with an answerer that is using
   either renomination or regular nomination.

3.3.  "Nomination" attribute

   To deal with out-of-order delivery of nominations, this document
   defines a new STUN attribute [RFC8489], NOMINATION, which carries a
   32-bit unsigned integer in network byte order.  This attribute is
   comprehension-required, as it is only used when both sides have
   explicitly negotiated support via the "renomination2" ICE option.

   When the "renomination2" ICE option has been negotiated, the
   controlling side MUST include a NOMINATION attribute in every
   connectivity check that includes USE-CANDIDATE.  The first such
   request for an ICE generation (i.e., for a given set of ICE
   credentials) and component MAY use any value.  Subsequent nomination
   requests for that same ICE generation and component MUST use a
   strictly greater value than any prior nomination request sent for
   that component.  NOMINATION values for different components are not
   compared.

   The controlled side MUST compare the received NOMINATION value
   against the highest previously accepted NOMINATION value for the
   current ICE generation and component.  If the received value is
   greater, the nomination is accepted and the nominated pair is updated
   for that component.  If the received value is less than or equal to
   the stored value, the request MUST be ignored for the purpose of
   updating the nominated pair.  If the NOMINATION attribute is absent,
   the request MUST be similarly ignored, unless the scenario noted in
   Section 3.2 applies, where the SDP answer has not yet arrived and it
   is currently unclear to the offerer whether regular nomination or
   renomination is in use.  In this situation, a connectivity check with
   USE-CANDIDATE but no NOMINATION attribute MUST be processed as a
   regular nomination.

   If the ICE credentials are changed, i.e., by an ICE restart, this
   constitutes a new ICE generation, and the first-request rules above
   apply for each component.

4.  Interaction with ICE Lite

   Renomination is compatible with both full ICE and ICE Lite.  When
   using ICE Lite, the guidance in [RFC8445] for the controlling side to
   select the candidate pair with the highest priority is superseded by
   the mechanism described above.

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document requests that IANA make the following registrations:

5.1.  ICE Option Registration

   IANA is requested to add the following value to the "Interactive
   Connectivity Establishment (ICE) Options" registry:

   ICE Option name: renomination2 Description: The ICE option indicates
   that the ICE agent supports renomination.  Reference: RFC XXXX

5.2.  STUN Attribute Registration

   IANA is requested to add the following value to the "STUN Attributes"
   registry:

   Attribute Name: NOMINATION Value: 0x0030 Reference: RFC XXXX

   Note: Some implementations have already used 0x0030 for this
   attribute, and IANA has confirmed that this codepoint is available
   for registration by this specification.

6.  Security Considerations

   This mechanism extends the period during which ICE nomination can
   occur.  Although it does not introduce any significant new protocol
   surface, it will result in continued connectivity checks on non-
   selected candidate pairs.

   The existing consent freshness mechanism defined in [RFC7675] is used
   to ensure that the controlling side has permission to continue
   sending checks to these non-selected candidate pairs.

   However, keeping certain candidates alive may incur higher power and
   network usage (e.g., cellular or TURN candidates).  To control this,
   either side MAY discard candidates that it considers non-essential.

   This extension does not change the existing requirements for
   authenticating STUN checks or protecting application or media traffic
   sent over candidate pairs.

7.  Acknowledgements

   This document overlaps with similar ideas in
   [I-D.uberti-mmusic-nombis] and [I-D.oreland-dispatch-ice-nicer].

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC7675]  Perumal, M., Wing, D., Ravindranath, R., Reddy, T., and M.
              Thomson, "Session Traversal Utilities for NAT (STUN) Usage
              for Consent Freshness", RFC 7675, DOI 10.17487/RFC7675,
              October 2015, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7675>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8445]  Keranen, A., Holmberg, C., and J. Rosenberg, "Interactive
              Connectivity Establishment (ICE): A Protocol for Network
              Address Translator (NAT) Traversal", RFC 8445,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8445, July 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8445>.

   [RFC8489]  Petit-Huguenin, M., Salgueiro, G., Rosenberg, J., Wing,
              D., Mahy, R., and P. Matthews, "Session Traversal
              Utilities for NAT (STUN)", RFC 8489, DOI 10.17487/RFC8489,
              February 2020, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8489>.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.oreland-dispatch-ice-nicer]
              Oreland, J. and H. T. Alvestrand, "NICER - a better usage
              profile on ICE", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              oreland-dispatch-ice-nicer-00, 6 July 2021,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-oreland-
              dispatch-ice-nicer-00>.

   [I-D.thatcher-ice-renomination]
              Thatcher, P., Zhang, H., and T. Brandstetter, "ICE
              Renomination: Dynamically selecting ICE candidate pairs",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-thatcher-ice-
              renomination-01, 19 September 2016,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-thatcher-ice-
              renomination-01>.

   [I-D.uberti-mmusic-nombis]
              Uberti, J. and J. Lennox, "Improvements to ICE Candidate
              Nomination", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              uberti-mmusic-nombis-00, 9 March 2015,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-uberti-
              mmusic-nombis-00>.

   [RFC8838]  Ivov, E., Uberti, J., and P. Saint-Andre, "Trickle ICE:
              Incremental Provisioning of Candidates for the Interactive
              Connectivity Establishment (ICE) Protocol", RFC 8838,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8838, January 2021,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8838>.

Authors' Addresses

   Peter Thatcher
   Google
   Email: pthatcher@google.com


   Honghai Zhang
   Email: honghaiz@google.com


   Taylor Brandstetter
   Google
   Email: deadbeef@google.com


   Justin Uberti
   OpenAI
   Email: justin@uberti.name
